Statistica Applicata - Italian Journal of Applied Statistics Vol. 30 (2)               269
doi.org/10.26398/IJAS.0030-012
   PREDICTING THE FUTURE OF FREE AGENT RECEIVERS
             AND TIGHT ENDS IN THE NFL



Jason Mulholland, Shane T. Jensen1
Department of Statistics, The Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, USA

Abstract: While the NFL Draft is an important way to add new talent in the National
Football League, free agency is the primary method for teams to acquire veteran players.
Veteran players cost teams more money to sign, making it critical for teams to ensure that
the free agents they sign are worth their higher salaries. We focus on predicting the future
salary, performance, and value of free agents at the wide receiver and tight end positions.
These two positions have recently gathered attention as the NFL has transitioned to more
passing-oriented offenses. We use player’s physical attributes, college performance, and
NFL performance to date to create regression and tree models that predict the likelihood
that a player is signed, how much they will cost, and how productive the player will be in
the future. We find that there are differences between the predictors of salary and the
predictors of future performance, which suggests teams are not efficiently evaluating free
agents at these positions.
Keywords: National Football League, Prediction, Linear Regression, Recursive
          Partitioning Trees.

1. INTRODUCTION
In addition to the NFL Draft, free agency is a primary method for adding talent to
an NFL team. Mulholland and Jensen (2014) used statistical models to predict the
draft order and future success of NFL prospects at the tight end position. However,
predicting the signing and future performance of free agents is a distinct problem.
Free agents already have experience in the league and so additional information can
be incorporated into their predictions. Additionally, unlike drafted players, there
is no set wage scale for free agents. Players selected in the NFL Draft have contracts
that are pre-determined for the first 4 years of their career based on when they are
chosen in the draft. Meanwhile, free agents can negotiate their own salaries with any
team they desire. Thus, to effectively model NFL free agency, we must model both
future player performance and salary, as teams would like to find players who will
have high performance for relatively low cost.

   1   Corresponding author: Shane T. Jensen, email: stjensen@wharton.upenn.edu
270                                                        Mulholland, J., Jensen, S.T.


      In American football, the goal is to advance the ball, through a series of plays,
to the opposing end of the field to score a touchdown. The ball can be advanced
through running plays or passing plays. Running plays usually feature the running
back carrying the ball as far as he can before being tackled. Meanwhile, a passing
play features the quarterback throwing the ball to one of the skill-position players
(usually a wide receiver or tight end).
      Pass-catching positions have grown in importance in the NFL in recent years,
as many NFL teams now pass on over 60% of their offensive plays. For example,
the average salary devoted to the tight end position grew from $974,761 (1.1% of the
team’s salary cap) in 2005 to $1,960,944 (1.6% of their team’s salary cap) by 2013.
In 2005 only one tight end free agent signed a contract with an average salary over $1.5
million, while in 2013, ten tight end free agents signed contracts worth that much,
including six contracts averaging at least $4 million (3.3% of their team’s salary cap).
      Wide receivers are often regarded as being worth a substantial portion of a
team’s salary cap. For example, the Miami Dolphins signed Mike Wallace to a 5-
year $60 million deal in 2013. This average salary of $12 million is 9.8% of the $123
million salary cap from 2013. No tight end (whether reaching free agency or not)
has ever signed a contract worth over $10 million per year, while several wide
receivers take an even larger portion of the salary cap (especially the Calvin Johnson
and Larry Fitzgerald contracts that were worth over $16 million per year).
      With increasing salaries, it is becoming even more important to maximize the
value achieved from signing each player. As a cautionary tale, consider tight end
James Casey who was signed in the 2013 offseason by the Philadelphia Eagles to
a 3-year contract with an average salary of $4 million. Over the 2013 and 2014
seasons, Casey accumulated only 90 receiving yards and two touchdowns on six
catches and was the third tight end on the Eagles depth chart. He was then cut
following the 2014 season. It is important for NFL teams to avoid overpaying
players for their performance given the constraint of the salary cap. In this paper,
we will present models for predicting future performance of free agent tight ends
and wide receivers as well as models for predicting future value in terms of
performance per unit of cost.
      In creating our prediction models, we use only quantitative variables that
would be available to teams at the time of their free agent decisions. These predictor
variables include each free agent’s physical measures, college attended, college
performance, and NFL performance (and salary) to date. Dhar (2011) used similar
statistical models to analyze wide receiver draft prospects, as did Mulholland and
Jensen (2014) to analyze draft decisions for tight ends.
      In Section 2, we outline our available data and discuss the statistical
methodology used in our analysis. In Section 3, we present predictive models for
which free agents will be signed and what those players will be paid, while Section
Predicting the Future of Free Agent Receivers and Tight Ends in the NFL            271

4 presents predictive models for the subsequent performance and value of those
players. Section 5 compares the set of variables predictive of free agent signings
(Section 3) to the set of variables predictive of future performance (Section 4).
Then, in Section 6, we discuss models we created to predict a different NFL
performance measure, approximate value, for comparison to our models from
Section 4. We conclude with a discussion in Section 7. However, as an appendix,
we also present a case study where our models’ predictions for the 2014 wide
receiver free agent class are evaluated.

2. DATA AND METHODOLOGY
Our study focuses on all unrestricted free agent tight ends and wide receivers from
the 2005 offseason until the 2013 offseason, which were the years available on
ESPN’s NFL Free Agent Tracker (http://espn.go.com/nfl/freeagency/) at the time.
This includes 242 free agent tight ends (of which 156 were signed) and 372 free
agent wide receivers (of which 235 were signed). We also obtained data for the 67
free agent wide receivers from the 2014 offseason in order to evaluate our
predictions in the appendix.
       We allow only predictor variables in our models that are known to teams at the
time of their free agent signing decisions. Specifically, teams are aware of each
player’s physical attributes, college attended, college performance, NFL perfor-
mance to date, and NFL salary to date. For our outcome variables in Section 4, we
also need data for the subsequent NFL performance and salary of these players after
their free agency period. All of the data that we gathered for this study are available
on public websites.
       The physical attributes, college attended, and NFL performance data (both
before and after free agency) were obtained from pro-football-reference.com.
Physical attributes include age, height, weight, and BMI, which are measured at the
NFL Combine before a player enters the league. College attended was used to create
indicator variables for conference that each player competed in. For tight ends, we
identified whether the player competed in a BCS-level (Bowl Championship Series
– i.e. division I-A) conference or not, while for wide receivers, we additionally
identified whether a receiver played in the Southeastern Conference (SEC), Big
Ten, Pacific 12 (Pac-12), Big 12, or Atlantic Coast Conference (ACC).
       The NFL performance data include years played in the NFL, games played,
games started, receiving yards, receiving touchdowns, and Pro Football Reference’s
“approximate value” (AV). We used these variables to create additional measures
of receiving production: NFL career score, NFL career score per game, and NFL
career score per year. NFL career score is calculated as:
   NFL Career Score = Receiving Yards + 19.3 × Receiving Touchdowns
272                                                         Mulholland, J., Jensen, S.T.


      The multiplier of 19.3 comes from the analysis of Stuart (2008) which found
that 20.3 is the average yardage distance that is equal in value to scoring a receiving
touchdown from the one-yard-line, as calculated from the expected point totals for
each location on the field. One yard must be subtracted due to the one yard that must
be advanced to score a touchdown from the one-yard-line, giving 19.3 as the
yardage value equivalent to a receiving touchdown. NFL career score is a measure
of aggregate receiving production, while NFL career score per game and per year
are measures of average receiving production. Note that each of these measures was
calculated separately for the pre-free-agency career versus the post-free-agency
career of each player.
      Approximate value is a measure that Pro Football Reference uses to estimate a
player’s production. We use this variable as an alternate NFL performance measure
to evaluate the validity of our use of games started and the NFL career score measures.
      College performance data were obtained from sports-reference.com/cfb. The
data include each player’s total receptions, receiving yards, and receiving touchdowns
for their college career. We created the additional variables of career college yards
per reception and final year percentages of receptions, yards, and touchdowns (i.e.
the percentages of each of these three statistics that were accumulated in the
player’s final college season).
      Salary data were obtained from spotrac.com and the USA Today salaries
database. We focus on the “cap hit”, the portion of the salary cap consumed by each
player, as this is the value that is most important to NFL teams. NFL teams must
adhere to a strict salary cap, meaning that the sum of all players’ cap hits on each team
must be below a certain level (i.e. the salary cap). We also assign each player a “cost”
as the logarithm of his average cap hit (since salary data tend to behave log-normally).
      We also considered using results from the pre-draft NFL combine for each
player. However, the available combine data begins in 1999 and since many of the free
agents in our sample entered the NFL prior to 1999, there were not sufficient data.
      Overall, for predicting tight end-related outcome variables, there are 16
possible predictor variables: an indicator of having attended a BCS college, age,
height, weight, BMI, the seven college receiving statistics, and the four NFL
performance to date variables. For wide receiver-related outcome variables, we add
an additional five possible predictor variables: the college conference indicator
variables. Also, for predicting salary, there is the one additional possible predictor
of salary to date.
      We will employ two different types of statistical models using all of these
predictor variables: ordinary least squares linear regression and recursive partitioning
trees. We also employ a logistic regression model for the binary outcome of whether
Predicting the Future of Free Agent Receivers and Tight Ends in the NFL            273

or not a free agent will be signed. We implement these models using JMP10
statistical software.
      In our linear regression models, we use stepwise variable selection (Hocking,
1976) to identify the subset of predictor variables that maximizes the predictive
power of the model, as measured by adjusted R2. In addition to this variable
selection, our regression analysis is helpful for examining the partial effects of
individual predictor variables. However, we will be cautious about interpreting our
partial effects due to the presence of multicollinearity.
      To explore the possibility of non-linear effects and interactions between
predictor variables, we also employ recursive partitioning tree models. Recursive
partitioning models (Breiman et.al., 1984) estimate a decision tree that predicts an
outcome value for groups of observations that are partitioned into terminal nodes
based on binary splits on a subset of the predictor variables. The particular
predictor variables used (and the splitting values) are calculated to maximize
the logworth = –log10(p value of F statistic), where the F statistic measures the ratio
of the between-node variance to the within-node variance. A larger logworth
indicates a greater difference between the terminal nodes and hence greater
predictive power for the model. We prune each decision tree branch if the number
of observations in the terminal node falls below 40 or if there are no possible splits
that have a logworth greater than 1.3, which indicates that each split is significant
at the 5% level (–log10(0.05) = 1.3).
      The variables that are used as splitting variables closer to the initial node of
the tree tend to have the highest logworth and are, therefore, the most significant.
We do note that recursive partitioning has a tendency to select continuous variables
over categorical variables (Strobi et.al., 2007), but we have found that in our models
some of the dummy variables were selected at a relatively high frequency.
      We compare the fit of our regression and tree models using the root mean
square error (RMSE) of the predicted values from each model, where RMSE is
defined as the square root of the average of the squares of the differences between
the predicted and actual values of the outcome variable. Our logistic regressions
are evaluated using R2 values based on Cox and Snell (1989).


3. PREDICTING FREE AGENT SIGNING AND FREE AGENT SALARIES
Whether a team decides to sign a free agent and for how much money are indications
of how productive the team believes that free agent will be in the future. Our first
set of models predict whether or not each free agent player will be signed and for
how much money (in terms of average salary cap hit). These models will allow us
274                                                                                                    Mulholland, J., Jensen, S.T.


to assess which predictors are currently important in NFL teams’ evaluation of tight
end and wide receiver free agents.
      A summary of all of the models presented in this section, as well as those from
the following section, can be seen in Tables 1-4. Table 1 and Table 2 show the
variables selected for the regression models for tight ends and wide receivers,
respectively. In these two tables, a blank implies the variable was not selected for
that model, a “+” implies that variable was selected with a positive coefficient, and
a “-” implies that variable was selected with a negative coefficient. Additionally, if
the “-” or “+” is in gray shading, that indicates that the variable was significant at
the 5% level for that given model. Table 3 and Table 4 show summary statistics of
the tight end and wide receiver models, respectively.

Tab. 1: Tight End Regression Model Variables. Rows are predictor variables and columns are
        response variables. “+” means selected by the model with a positive coefficient, “ – ”
        means selected by the model with a negative sign, and a blank cell means not selected
        by the model. Gray shading indicates that the predictor variable was significant at the
        5% level for that given model.
                  Signed vs.    LN (salary)   NFL Games     NFL Career   NFLCS per   NFLCS per   NFL Games     NFL Career   NFLCS per   NFLCS per
                   Unsigned         PFA       Started PFA   Score PFA    Game PFA     Year PFA   Started per    Score per   Games per    Year per
Variable           (logistic)                                                                     Cost PFA      Cost PFA     Cost PFA    Cost PFA

Age in Upcoming        –                         –             –              –          –             –            –          –
Season
Height
Weight                 –
BMI
BCS                    +
Career College
Yards per              +                                                      +          +
Reception
Career College                         +                                      +          +
Reception
Career College                         _                       _              _          _                          _
Yards
Career College                         +         –                                       –             –
Touchdowns
Final Year
College Rec                                                                   –
Percentage
Final Year
College Yards          +
Percentage
Final Year
College TDs            –                                                      +
Percentage
NFL Games
Started (per           +                         +                            –          –             +                       –            –
cost) to Date
NFLCareer Score
(per cost) to          –               –
Date
NFLCS per Game
(per cost) to          –               –                                      +
Date
NFLCS per Year
(per cost) to          +               +                       +              +          +                          +          +            +
Date
Average Cap Hit
to Date
Predicting the Future of Free Agent Receivers and Tight Ends in the NFL                                                                      275

Tab. 2: Wide Receiver Regression Model Variables. Rows are predictor variables and columns
        are response variables. “+” means selected by the model with a positive coefficient,
        “–” means selected by the model with a negative sign, and a blank cell means not selected
        by the model. Gray shading indicates that the predictor variable was significant at the
        5% level for that given model.
                  Signed vs.    LN (salary)   NFL Games     NFL Career   NFLCS per   NFLCS per   NFL Games     NFL Career   NFLCS per   NFLCS per
                   Unsigned         PFA       Started PFA   Score PFA    Game PFA     Year PFA   Started per    Score per   Games per    Year per
Variable           (logistic)                                                                     Cost PFA      Cost PFA     Cost PFA    Cost PFA

Age in Upcoming        –                         –             –              –          –             –            –          –            –
Season
Height                                                                                                              –
Weight                                                                        –          –                                     –            –
BMI                                    –
SEC
Big Ten                                          +             +              +          +             +            +          +                +
Big 12                                           –             –              +
Pa-12                                            –             –                                       –            –
ACC                                              –             –                                       –            –
BCS                                    –         –             –              –          –             –            –          –            –
Career College
Yards per                                                                                              +
Reception
Career College                                                                                                                 +            +
Reception
Career College                                                                +          +             +
Yards
Career College                         –                                      –          –                                     –
Touchdowns
Final Year
College Rec                                                                                            +                                    +
Percentage
Final Year
College Yards
Percentage
Final Year
College TDs                            –                                      –          –             –                       –            –
Percentage
NFL Games
Started (per           –               –         –                                       –
cost) to Date
NFLCareer Score
(per cost) to                                                                            +
Date
NFLCS per Game
(per cost) to          –               –                       +              +                        +            +          +
Date
NFLCS per Year
(per cost) to          +               +         +                                       +                                                  +
Date
Average Cap Hit
to Date                                –


3.1 FREE AGENT SIGNING
Our fitted logistic regression model for whether or not each free agent tight end was
signed by a team has an R2 value of 0.152 (significant at the 0.01% level). Ten (of
16 possible) predictor variables were selected by the model, seven of which have
partial effects that are significant at the 5% level. The selected predictors for tight
ends include physical variables (age and weight), college variables (BCS indicator,
career yards per reception, final year yards percentage, and final year touchdowns
percentage), and NFL performance to date variables (NFL career score to date, NFL
career score per game to date, NFL career score per year to date, and NFL games
started to date). The two most significant variables are age in upcoming season and
NFL career score per year to date, each significant at the 1% level.
      Our fitted logistic regression model for whether or not each free agent wide
receiver was signed by a team has an R2 value of 0.098 (significant at the 1% level).
276                                    Mulholland, J., Jensen, S.T.

       Tab. 3: Tight End Model Summaries




      Tab. 4: Wide Receiver Model Summaries
Predicting the Future of Free Agent Receivers and Tight Ends in the NFL              277

It includes four (of 21 possible) predictor variables: age in upcoming season, NFL
games started to date, NFL career score per game to date, and NFL career score per
year to date. Of these predictor variables, age in upcoming season and NFL career
score per year to date are the most significant (both at the 1% level) just as they are
in the model for tight ends.
       The logistic regression models for both tight ends and wide receivers suggest
that the primary focus of evaluators is average performance per year thus far and
how many years a player has left in the league, as measured by age. We also note
that NFL games started to date has a negative coefficient in both models, which
suggests that among players with similar receiving production and age, those with
more starts are less likely to be signed. This likely is due to the fact that players with
more games started are likely older and past the prime of their career. Additionally,
they likely have taken more of a physical beating in their career and could be more
of an injury risk.
       Our prediction models for players’ salaries after free agency show interesting
similarities and differences from the logistic regression models for whether a player
is signed or not. In our model for salary, we use the natural log of the player’s salary
(in thousands) as the outcome variable. Salary data behaves approximately log-
normally, so using the log of the salary is a better fit to the assumptions of a linear
regression model.

3.2 FREE AGENT SALARIES
The fitted linear regression model for tight end free agent salaries has an adjusted
R2 of 0.184 (significant at the 0.01% level). This model selected six (of 17 possible)
predictor variables that are a combination of college performance and NFL
performance to date. Specifically, the selected predictors were college receptions,
yards, and touchdowns and NFL career score to date, NFL career score per game
to date, and NFL career score per year to date. Among these, college receptions and
NFL career score per game to date are the only variables not significant at the 10%
level. NFL career score per year to date is the only variable significant at the 1%
level, indicating that average receiving production to date is the leading indicator
for tight end salary.
      We see similar results in our fitted recursive partitioning tree model for tight
end free agent salary. The tree model has an R2 of 0.386 and RMSE of 0.695, which
improves upon the RMSE of 0.764 for the linear regression model. The first split
in the tree uses NFL career score per game to date, which confirms that average NFL
receiving productivity is the most important predictor of tight end salary. The tree
uses college and NFL performance variables as well as NFL salary to date as the
278                                                             Mulholland, J., Jensen, S.T.


splitting variables in all but one of the tree’s eight splits.
       Our results for wide receiver free agent salaries echo those for tight ends,
though college performance does not appear as frequently in the wide receiver
models. The fitted linear regression model for wide receiver free agent salary had
an adjusted R2 of 0.325 (significant at the 0.01% level). Eight (out of 22 possible)
predictors were selected: salary to date, BCS indicator, BMI, college touchdowns,
college final year touchdown percentage, NFL games started to date, NFL career
score per game to date, and NFL career score per year to date. Similar to our models
for tight end salary, the most significant (at a 0.01% level) variable for wide receiver
salary is NFL career score per year to date.
       In this salary model, NFL games started to date has a negative coefficient
(significant at the 1% level), just as it did in the logistic regression for whether a
wide receiver would be signed or not. This may indicate that players with more
games started are seen as a more substantial injury risk in the future, which is
factored into a lower expected salary. It is surprising that the BCS indicator variable
is included with a negative coefficient in the wide receiver free agent salary model.
One possible explanation is selection bias due to the fact that the highest paid
players in free agency are often players who were low-draft picks (from non-BCS
schools) which outperformed their low-paying rookie contracts, whereas premier
players (from BCS schools) are more likely to be re-signed prior to reaching free
agency because they will require less of a pay increase from their relatively more
expensive rookie contracts. In our sample, only 23% of the non-BCS wide receivers
were picked in the first three rounds of the draft, as compared to 58% for BCS wide
receivers. Meanwhile, only 10% of the non-BCS tight ends in our sample were
picked in the first three rounds, which is very low relative to the mark of 41% for
tight ends from BCS schools.
       As compared to this regression model, we see generally similar findings in our
fitted recursive partitioning tree model for wide receiver free agent salary. The tree
model had an R2 of 0.474 and RMSE of 0.770, which improves upon the RMSE
of 0.891 for the linear regression model. The fact that NFL career score per year
to date is used as the splitting variable in the first two levels of the partitioning tree
confirms the importance of prior NFL productivity. One interesting difference in
the tree model is the role of the physical measure BMI. The regression model did
include BMI, but it was not significant even at the 20% level. In the tree model,
BMI is used in three splits, with lower BMI giving higher predicted salary in each
split. This suggests that in free agency, smaller wide receivers (often slot receivers)
like Emmanuel Sanders in 2014 will tend to be higher paid. As we discuss later, this may
be logical as slot receivers tend to be the best available free agent receivers, as the larger,
Predicting the Future of Free Agent Receivers and Tight Ends in the NFL             279

premier wide outs (like Calvin Johnson, Dez Bryant, Demaryius Thomas, etc.) tend to
be re-signed or franchise-tagged before reaching free agency.
      In summary, our models for free agent signing and free agent salary have
suggested that average NFL receiving performance to date is the most important
factor in NFL teams’ evaluation of receiver free agents. The age of free agents is
found to be important for predicting signing or not, but not important for predicting
salaries. We also see that when signing free agent wide receivers, there seems to be
a bias towards the smaller but talented slot receivers.


4. PREDICTING FUTURE FREE AGENT PERFORMANCE AND VALUE
We now shift our focus to trying to predict the performance of tight end and wide
receivers after they have been signed as free agents. We employ several different
measures of NFL performance after free agency: NFL games started post-free-
agency, NFL career score post-free-agency, NFL career score per game post-free-
agency and NFL career score per year post-free-agency. The first two measures are
indicative of cumulative performance whereas the latter two measures are indica-
tive of average performance. For the cumulative performance measures, we
required three years of post-free agency performance data to attempt to limit the
issue of censoring, as there are some players in our data set that have incomplete
data since they are still active in the league.
      For each of these outcome measures, we create both linear regression and
recursive partitioning tree models. In addition, we will also examine the concept of
value for each player by dividing each of these outcome measures by the “cost”
(log-salary) of each player.
      It is important to note that these models are aimed to predict the future
performance of free agents at the wide receiver and tight end positions, not the
future performance of all players at these positions. Thus, selection bias may lead
to certain variables to have some surprising effects, as the best players at these
positions are often given contract extensions before they reach free agency.

4.1 PREDICTING NFL GAMES STARTED POST-FREE AGENCY
NFL games started post-free agency is an important measure of NFL perfor-
mance because it captures aspects of player contribution other than the usual
receiving statistics.
      A player can be a starter for a team for reasons other than pure receiving: a tight
end or wide receiver can also earn a starting job for leadership ability, ability to
attract defenders and create space, and blocking ability. As a specific example,
280                                                        Mulholland, J., Jensen, S.T.


Hines Ward did not produce high receiving statistics in the final two years of his
career, but he still was a starting wide receiver for the Pittsburgh Steelers due to his
ability to block and attract defenders. Additionally, Larry Fitzgerald (who is
currently one of the highest paid wide receivers of all time) does not produce
receiving stats at the incredible level he did from 2007 to 2011 (when he had 5
straight 1000-yard seasons and had 49 touchdowns in that five year span). However,
due to his still respectable receiving production and his impressive blocking ability
in both the run game and downfield on pass plays, he continues to start for the
Cardinals and earn his high salary.
      Our regression linear model for NFL games started post-free agency of tight
ends has an adjusted R2 of 0.228 (significant at the 0.01% level). The model selected
three (out of 16 possible) predictors: age, college touchdowns, and NFL games
started to date. College touchdowns is significant only at the 10% level while the
other two variables are significant at the 0.01% level.
      The significance of age and NFL games started to date makes sense as tight
ends who have started in the past are likely to start in the future, while a younger
player will have more time remaining in his career to start more games. The
regression model for the per-cost version of this outcome variable included the
same three predictor variables, which suggests these variables are predictors of not
only tight end starters, but high value tight end starters.
      The recursive partitioning tree model for NFL games started post-free-agency
of tight ends shows similar results to the linear regression model. The tree model
has an R2 of 0.273 and a RMSE of 14.11, which improves slightly upon the RMSE
of 14.79 for the linear regression model. The first three splits in the fitted tree use
age or NFL games started to date, which are also the two significant variables in the
linear regression model. The fitted tree for the per-cost version of NFL games
started post-free-agency is highly similar.
      Overall, these models indicate that post-free agency games started for a tight
end can be best predicted by how many games the player has started pre-free-
agency and an estimate of how many years the player has remaining in the NFL (as
measured by age).
      Our regression linear model for NFL games started post-free agency for wide
receivers has an adjusted R2 of 0.281 and selected eight (of 21 possible) predictor
variables. Three predictors are significant at the 1% level: these are the Big Ten
indicator (positive coefficient), age (negative coefficient), and NFL career score per
year to date (positive coefficient). The linear model for the per-cost version of this
outcome is similar, with three variables significant at the 1% level: the Big Ten
indicator (positive coefficient), age (negative coefficient), and NFL career score per
Predicting the Future of Free Agent Receivers and Tight Ends in the NFL             281

game per cost to date (positive coefficient). Young players from the Big Ten who
have the highest average performance pre-free-agency are predicted to start the
most games in the future.
       The recursive partitioning tree model for NFL games started post-free agency
of wide receivers has an R2 of 0.389 and a RMSE of 14.36, which improves upon
the RMSE of 15.62 of the linear regression model. The five highest-level splits in
the fitted tree use NFL career score per year to date, BMI, and age as the splitting
variables. These are similar findings to the linear regression in that average NFL
performance and age are important, but the significance of BMI in the tree is
surprising given its absence from the regression model. The fitted tree model
suggests that wide receivers with lower BMIs tend to have more games started post-
free agency. The fitted tree model for the per-cost version of NFL games started
post-free-agency is similar in that the first three levels of splits use NFL career score
per year per cost, the Big Ten dummy variable, and BMI.
       Overall, it is interesting to find that while age is very important to predicting
future games started for both tight ends and wide receivers, previous starting
experience is the most important NFL performance predictor for tight ends’
projected future games started, while previous average receiving production is most
important for wide receivers.

4.2 PREDICTING NFL CAREER SCORE POST-FREE AGENCY
The cumulative measure of NFL receiving performance after free agency that we use
as an outcome variable is NFL career score post-free agency. NFL career score post-
free agency combines the yards and touchdowns that a tight end or receiver obtains
after free agency, which are the primary ways a pass catcher helps their team.
      The regression model for NFL career score post-free agency of tight ends has
an adjusted R2 of 0.188 (significant at the 0.01% level). Three (of 16 possible)
predictor variables are included in the model: age and NFL career score per year to
date (significant at the 1% level) and college yards (significant at the 10% level).
The importance of age and average pre-free-agency performance makes sense,
as players who produce a high yardage and touchdown total each year and have
more years remaining in the league should be expected to have higher cumulative
production in their post-free-agency career. The regression model for the per-cost
version of this outcome confirms these same selected variables.
      The recursive partitioning tree model for NFL career score post-free agency
of tight ends confirms the findings of the linear regression model. The partition has
an R2 of 0.237 and an RMSE of 401.41, which is lower than the regression’s RMSE
of 424.66. All splits in the fitted tree use age or NFL career score per year to date
282                                                          Mulholland, J., Jensen, S.T.


as the splitting variable, which are the two most significant predictor variables in
the linear regression. The fitted tree for the per-cost version of this outcome variable
is also highly similar, demonstrating that prediction of NFL career score post-free
agency and NFL career score per cost post-free agency of tight ends relies primarily
on average annual performance and age.
       The regression model for NFL career score post-free agency of wide receivers
has an adjusted R2 of 0.242 and selected seven (of a possible 21) predictor variables.
The selected variables are highly similar to those selected as predictors of NFL
games started post-free agency of wide receivers. In this model, age and NFL career
score per game are both 0.01% significant and the Big Ten dummy is the third most
significant. The regression model for the per-cost version of this outcome also
selects age, NFL career score per game per cost to date, and the Big Ten dummy as
the three most significant variables.
       The recursive partitioning tree model for NFL career score post-free agency
of wide receivers has an R2 of 0.373 and an RMSE of 1035, which improves upon
the RMSE of 1142 of the regression model. The fitted tree shows some differences
from the regression model just discussed but is notably similar to the tree model for
NFL games started post-free agency. As in the games started tree, this NFL career
score tree only uses NFL career score per year to date and BMI as splitting variables
for the first three levels. We see that BMI is again an important variable in the tree
model but not in regression model, which suggests that BMI has a non-linear
relationship with cumulative performance.
       The tree model for the per-cost version of this outcome closely emulates the
other wide receiver NFL career score post-free agency models. NFL career score
per year per cost to date, BMI, and are used as the splitting variables in the first three
levels of the tree.
       Overall, these findings suggest that in addition to being projected to start the
most games in the future, young receivers from the Big Ten who have high average
performance in the past will tend to have the best cumulative receiving performan-
ce and value in the future.

4.3 PREDICTING AVERAGE NFL PERFORMANCE POST-FREE AGENCY
The outcome measures in Sections 4.1-4.2 were both cumulative measures of
post-free agency career performance. We now examine two outcome measures of
average post-free agency performance: post-free agency NFL career score per
game and NFL career score per year. While the per-game performance captures
only performance on the field, the per-year performance measure also incorporates
how many games played, which can be impacted by injury or suspension. If a player
Predicting the Future of Free Agent Receivers and Tight Ends in the NFL             283

is injury prone or has off-field issues which leads to suspension, that will affect their
performance per year but not performance per game.
       These average measures will be especially relevant to teams signing players
to short-term contracts where high average productivity is needed more than high
cumulative productivity. In this section, we will focus our analysis on models for
the per-game outcome and mention some differences from the models for the per-
year outcome, as they show similar results.
       The linear regression model for the NFL career score per game post-free
agency of tight ends has an adjusted R2 of 0.331 (significant at the 0.01% level).
Nine variables (of a possible 16) were selected: age plus eight variables consisting
of a mix of college and NFL performance to date. Interestingly, the four variables
significant at the 5% level are all college performance variables (college yards per
reception, college receptions, college yards, and final year college reception
percentage). However, the model for the per-cost version of this outcome model
selected three variables: age, NFL games started to date, and NFL career score per
year per cost to date. Of these, NFL career score per year per cost to date is the most
significant (at the 0.01% level). In total, these results seem to indicate that despite
college performance being a good predictor of per-game performance, the key
predictor of per-game “value” for tight ends is their per-year value in the past.
       The recursive partitioning tree model for NFL career score per game post-free
agency of tight ends has an R2 of 0.334 and an RMSE of 8.85, which improves
slightly on the RMSE of 8.99 for the regression model. This tree model uses NFL
career score per year to date as the initial splitting variable, but the remainder of the
tree uses a mix of physical and college performance variables. The fitted tree model
for the per-cost version of NFL career score per game has more focus on per-game
value in the past as a predictor of future per-game value, with NFL career score per
game per cost to date being the splitting variable in the first two splits of that tree.
       It seems that both models for per-game value rely more on average value in
the past, while the models for per-game performance include a wider variety of
predictor variables. For the tight end per-year performance models, we find a
similar result to those of the per-game models, as the college performance
predictors are still significant. Per-year performance to date is the most significant
predictor of future per-year performance in that model.
       Summarizing these models for tight ends, we find that for predicting average
performance there are a variety of factors (especially college) that have predictive
power in addition to average performance in the past, but for predicting average
value after free agency, average value in the past is the most important predictor.
       Our regression model for NFL career score per game post-free agency of wide
284                                                        Mulholland, J., Jensen, S.T.


receivers has a relatively high adjusted R2 of 0.419. This model selects nine (of 21
possible) predictors, four of which are significant at the 1% level: age, the BCS
indicator, career college yards, and NFL career score per game to date. Age and average
performance to date continue to show significance, while the other two variables are
not as important in earlier models. The BCS dummy was included in both of the
games started and cumulative NFL career score regressions, while the college
yardage measure was not included in either. College measures appear to provide an
indication of average performance, but not career length, as they are less present in
the models for the cumulative outcomes. Thus, college performance provides an
indication of future NFL performance, but not necessarily of career length.
       The model for the per-cost version of NFL career score per game of wide
receivers has one difference in the most important predictors: a college measure was
replaced with weight with a negative coefficient, indicating that the smaller wide
receiver free agents provide higher average value. This is an interesting finding since,
while we found that small receivers tend to be paid more, we have also now found them
to provide more value, indicating they are more than worth the higher pay.
       The recursive partitioning tree model for NFL career score per game to date
has a R2 of 0.478 and RMSE is 16.79, which is a slight improvement upon the
RMSE of 17.83 for the regression model. The first two levels of the tree use NFL
career score per game to date and NFL career score per year to date as the splitting
variables, indicating past average performance is the most important predictor of
future average performance. The third level includes college yards and BMI as
splitting variables, which provides a further indication that college performance is
important for predicting average professional performance. BMI continues to be
included in our tree models but not the linear regression models. The tree model for
the per-cost version of this outcome measure is generally similar with one notable
difference: weight was used for a second-level split in the tree, indicating weight’s
importance in predicting average value.
       Our regression model for predicting wide receiver per-year performance
shows a single difference from the per-game performance models: the college
performance measures are no longer significant, as college performance likely has
less predictive value for the number of games missed in a season. The recursive
partition tree (shown in Fig. 1) has average performance to date as the first two splits
and we also see smaller players (low BMI and low weight) have better predictions.
Predicting the Future of Free Agent Receivers and Tight Ends in the NFL                 285




 Fig. 1: Fitted recursive partitioning tree with post-free-agency NFL career score per year
         for wide receivers as the outcome variable. The number in the final node indicates
                  the average expectation of players that would fall into that node.


5. COMPARISON OF SALARY AND PERFORMANCE MODELS
In this section, we compare the variables that are most predictive of free agent
signing and salary to the variables most predictive of future performance in order
to evaluate whether NFL teams are focusing on the most important factors in their
decision-making process.
      Overall, our models tend to do better predicting average performance than
cumulative performance and do better predicting wide receivers than tight ends, as
seen by the higher adjusted R2 values. It makes sense that average performance is
easier to predict, as cumulative performance is also impacted by the extra variability
in career length.
286                                                                   Mulholland, J., Jensen, S.T.


      Among the models for predicting future wide receiver performance, two
predictor variables appear more consistently than all of the others: age and NFL
career score per year to date. NFL career score per year to date is the first splitting
variable in the majority of the partition trees. A player who is younger will have
more years remaining in the league, and if they have higher per-year performance
in the past, they are more expected to perform at a high level in the future.
      It is interesting to note that age is not included in the regression model for
predicting salary (as seen in Fig. 2). This indicates that NFL teams tend to overpay
veteran players relative to their performance, as age is negatively correlated with
performance of free agents.
      The BCS indicator variable also plays an interesting role in our analyses. For
wide receivers, the BCS indicator is negatively correlated with future performance
in our prediction models. This may seem counterintuitive since many of the best
players in the NFL come from BCS conferences. A likely explanation is selection
bias: as mentioned earlier, our study is focused entirely on free agents, and many
of the best NFL players don’t reach free agency but rather are franchise tagged (with
a one-year high salary contract) or signed to long-term contract extensions by their
team. The top wide receiver free agents tend to be players who exceeded expectations.
Players who come from schools outside the BCS tend to be late round draft picks
or undrafted free agents who obtain low pay rookie contracts, as shown earlier.
Wide receivers who perform well in this subset will then become some of the best
free agents available. For tight ends, this effect is not as extreme, likely because tight
ends are usually paid less and so they are more affordable.
      Alongside the non-BCS players with the best projections in the wide receiver
models are those from the Big Ten. In these models, the Big Ten dummy is
consistently included with a positive coefficient, and is 5% significant in the two
cumulative performance models. However, after performing an influence analysis,
we find that taking out influential observations2 leads to the Big Ten dummy no
longer having 5% significance in any of the four post-free agency performance
models. The most influential observation is Derrick Mason (who went to
Michigan State University). Mason left the Tennessee Titans in free agency in
2005 at the age of 31 and went on to start 94 of 96 games for the Baltimore Ravens
over the next six seasons, including four seasons with over 1,000 receiving yards.
      Another interesting observation is that in the wide receiver models for the
average performance outcomes, weight is consistently negative and is very significant

   2                                                         4
       observations with Cook’s distance greater than a              cutoff, where n is the number of
                                                          n × k ×1

       observations in the model and k is the number of input variables
Predicting the Future of Free Agent Receivers and Tight Ends in the NFL           287

in the average value models. This result is surprising given that many of the top
receivers in the NFL over the past decade have been larger receivers, such as Calvin
Johnson, Brandon Marshall, Dez Bryant, Demaryius Thomas, A.J. Green, Larry
Fitzgerald, and Andre Johnson. However, note that only one of these top receivers
(Andre Johnson) reached free agency, and it was not until he had spent 12 years in
Houston. The other six are still with the team that drafted them or were traded
(Brandon Marshall).
       Teams tend to give the top outside wide receivers lucrative extensions before
they reach free agency, so that these players do not leave their original teams. It is
the smaller receivers (often lining up in the slot) who become some of the top free
agents, such as Emmanuel Sanders leaving the Steelers and joining the Broncos in
2014, Wes Welker leaving the Patriots and joining the Broncos in 2013, Danny
Amendola leaving the Rams and joining the Patriots in 2013, or Derrick Mason
leaving the Titans and joining the Ravens in 2005.
       For tight ends, meanwhile, we discovered that size has no significance in
predicting future salary, performance, or value. Height, weight, and BMI were not
included in any of the 9 models for salary, performance, and value of tight ends.
However, it was included in the model for predicting whether tight ends would be
signed (though with low significance).
       We also find that, while college receiving statistics are not important for
projection of wide receiver free agents in the NFL, they do have some significance
in prediction of future performance of tight end free agents. This may be due to the
fact that, in the NFL, wide receivers are targeted more frequently than tight ends (on
almost every team). This results in lower overall performance from tight ends,
which makes it harder to differentiate some tight ends based on past NFL
performance alone. Therefore, college statistics seem to be acting as a supplement
to the NFL performance to date predictor variables.
       In Table 5, we evaluate the extent to which the variables that are currently
important to evaluation of tight end and wide receiver free agents in the NFL are
similar to the optimal predictor variables selected in our models. Specifically, we
compare the adjusted R2 of our linear regression models for future performance
using either (1) the optimal predictors selected for that future performance measure
or (2) the predictors selected as most predictive of free agent salary. The extent to
which these two sets of predictors disagree is suggestive of inefficiency in
evaluation of free agents by NFL decision makers.
       In Table 5, we see that NFL teams are closer to the optimal adjusted R2 level
in the average performance measures, especially when considering wide receivers.
NFL decision makers are less close to the optimal adjusted R2 level for the
288                                                               Mulholland, J., Jensen, S.T.


cumulative measures of performance (and for tight ends), which indicates greater
uncertainty in evaluation of long-term performance. Thus, it is optimal for NFL
teams to sign wide receiver free agents to short-term contracts to minimize the
impact of the uncertainty in the ability of the player to sustain their performance.

 Tab. 5: Comparison of adjusted R2 of the models that we created (using optimal variables)
           versus the adjusted R2 of models created for the given post-free agency (PFA)
        outcome variable using the variables selected as most predictive of players’ salaries.
         Thus, a smaller gap between the corresponding adjusted R2 values would indicate
        more efficiency (in terms of paying players the efficient salary for their production).
                             Tight Ends                                  Wide Receivers
Optimal
Predictors vs.
Salary Selected       Adjusted R2         Adjusted R2       Adjusted R2 With     Adjusted R2 using
Predictors           With Optimal       using Ln(salary)       Optimal           Ln(salary) selected
                      Variables        selected Variables      Variables             Variables
NFL Games Started        0.228               0.086               0.281                    0.148
PFA
NFL Career Score         0.188               0.119               0.242                    0.154
PFA
NFL Career Score         0.331               0.251               0.419                    0.406
per Game PFA
NFL Career Score         0.246               0.153               0.419                    0.393
per Year PFA


      In Fig. 2, we examine the specific differences between the selected predictors
for NFL career score per year post-free agency and Ln(salary) post-free agency for
wide receivers. As seen in Table 5, this particular comparison is one where the
salary-selected predictors do almost as good of a job of prediction as the optimal-
selected predictors. Thus, we see a large overlap in the set of predictors in the Venn
diagram, though additional variables such as age and weight seem to be
underemphasized by evaluators.


6. PREDICTING FUTURE APPROXIMATE VALUE (AV) OF FREE
   AGENTS
To evaluate whether our NFL performance measures (NFL games started, NFL
career score, NFL career score per game, and NFL career score per year) are
appropriate indicators of tight ends’ and wide receivers’ contributions to their
teams, we have also created‘stepwise regression models to predict a player’s
approximate value (cumulative and per year) after free agency. Approximate value
Predicting the Future of Free Agent Receivers and Tight Ends in the NFL                     289




Fig. 2: Venn diagram comparing the selected variables from linear regression models for (1)
            NFL career score per year post-free agency as the outcome versus (2) natural
          logarithm of salary post-free agency as the outcome variable. A “+” indicates that
        the variable is included in the model with a positive coefficient, while a “–“, indicates
                        that the variable is included with a negative coefficient.


(AV) is a measure that Pro Football Reference uses as their “attempt to put a single
number on each player-season since 1950” (“Football glossary and football
statistics glossary,” 2000-2016).
      Our models for tight end AV and AV per year post-free agency each include
two predictor variables and have adjusted R2 values of 0.195 and 0.204, respectively.
Each of these models includes age (with a negative coefficient) and one of the two
measures of average NFL performance to date (NFL career score per game or per
year). Meanwhile, age and average NFL performance to date are consistently
among the most significant predictors of our NFL performance post-free agency
indicators.
      For wide receivers, our AV and AV per year post-free agency models include
a wider variety of predictor variables, but still show similar results to our models
for future (post-free agency) performance of wide receivers. These models have
adjusted R2 values of 0.225 and 0.368, respectively. Despite the inclusion of a wider
variety of predictor variables, we again find that the age (with a negative coefficient)
and a measure of average performance to date are the most significant predictors
(both are 0.01% significant in both models), which was also the case when
modeling our NFL performance post-free agency indicators for wide receivers.
290                                                        Mulholland, J., Jensen, S.T.


      Given the similar results provided by these models for prediction of the future
approximate value of free agents, the indication is that our NFL performance and
value post-free agency measures are appropriate measures of the contributions that
tight ends and wide receivers provide for their teams.


7. SUMMARY AND DISCUSSION
In this paper, we have presented statistical models for predicting the signing, salary
and future performance of NFL tight end and wide receiver free agents. Our
predictive modeling strategies were logistic regression, ordinary least squares
regressions, and recursive partitioning decision trees. These models have shown
that the most important variables for predicting the future performance of tight end
free agents include age, average annual receiving performance, number of NFL
games started, and some college performance variables. Meanwhile, the most
important variables for predicting the future performance of wide receiver free
agents include age, average annual receiving performance, the BCS college
indicator, and the player’s weight.
      We found that average performance is easier to predict than cumulative
performance, both in terms of lower overall prediction errors as well as greater
agreement between the optimal predictors of future average performance and the
optimal predictors of free agent salary. There is greater disagreement between the
predictors of future cumulative performance and the predictors of free agent salary.
      For tight ends, our results display one key inconsistency between predictors
of future performance and salary. The player’s age is included with a negative
coefficient in all four future performance regression models and three of the four
value (performance per cost) models, though it does not appear in the salary model.
Therefore, NFL teams are overpaying older tight ends relative to their expected
future performance.
      There seems to be an overpayment for older wide receivers, as well. All eight
of the performance and value regression models for wide receivers include age with
a negative coefficient, while yet again, it does not appear in the salary model.
Players who sign a contract lasting five or six years with a high salary beginning in
their players’ primes and continues until they are in the later stages of their careers
could influence this finding.
      We also identified a disparity between prediction of future wide receiver free
agent performance and salary.
      We find that smaller receivers are projected to have better performance and
value than their larger counterparts (weight appeared with a negative coefficient in
Predicting the Future of Free Agent Receivers and Tight Ends in the NFL            291

all average performance and value regression models and BMI – favoring a lower
value - appeared in all of the performance and value partitions). Meanwhile, weight
and BMI are not significant for prediction of salary, as weight does not appear in
the model and BMI is not even significant at the 20% level.
      Separately, it is interesting to note that there are some variables that change
in sign (positive versus negative impact) depending on the outcome variable. For
example, consider NFL games started to date for tight end free agents. Those who
have more games started to date are more likely to be signed and have a higher
expectation of expected starts in the future, but are projected to have lower average
performance (using both average performance measures: NFL career score per
game and NFL career score per year). This is could be due to the fact that a player
with many starts in the past is an experienced veteran in the league and will likely
continue to be a starter in the future, but also those with more starts have been in the
league longer. Thus, they are likely past their prime and will tend to have lower
average performance than they had produced in their prime.
      We present one final case study when our model would have suggested a better
decision. Brandon Jones and Brandon Lloyd were two free agent receivers in 2009.
Jones signed a contract with San Francisco, paying him $2.6 million that year, while
Lloyd signed a contract with Denver, paying him just over $500,000 that year. Our
models projected Jones, who was 27 at the time, to start only 7.6 more NFL games
and to have an NFL career score post-free agency of 450.5. In the end, Jones
appeared in 8 games that year and had one catch for 18 yards. He never appeared
in an NFL game again. On the other hand, Lloyd was projected to start 23.6 games
and to have an NFL career score of 1620.8. Brandon Lloyd since then has
exceeded these expectations with 44 starts and an actual NFL career score post-
free agency of 4141.3 by his retirement at the end of the 2014 season. Lloyd was
paid less than Jones in 2009, but was projected to perform better by our models.
In the end, he definitely had a better post-free agency performance, as our models
predicted.
     It is important to note several limitations of our approach. We only use
quantitative predictors, but it is important to take qualitative aspects into
consideration to adjust predictions, such as a player’s injury history, off-field
problems, and the depth chart with new team.
      We believe that paired with an analysis of these qualitative factors, our
quantitative models can improve the precision in predicting future performance of
tight end and wide receiver free agents in the NFL. We also believe that these
modeling strategies can be applied to other NFL positions, assuming a similar set
of variables can be established to be predictive of future performance.
292                                                                   Mulholland, J., Jensen, S.T.


REFERENCES
Breiman, L., Friedman, J., Stone, C.J. and Olshen, R.A. (1984). Classification and Regression Trees.
     Chapman and Hall/CRC, London. First edition.
Cox, D.R. and Snell, E.J. (1989). Analysis of Binary Data. Chapman & Hall, London. Second edition.
Dhar, A. (2011). “Drafting NFL wide receivers: Hit or miss?” Technical report. Department of
      Statistics, University of California at Berkeley.
“Football glossary and football statistics glossary.” (2016). Pro Football Reference, 2000-2016. http:/
      /www.pro-football-reference.com/about/glossary.htm. Accessed July 1, 2016.
Hocking, R.R. (1976). The analysis and selection of variables in linear regression. In Biometrics. 32:1-
     49.
JMP, Version 10. (2012). SAS Institute Inc., Cary, NC.
Mulholland, J. and Jensen, S.T. (2014). Predicting the draft and career success of tight ends in the
     National Football League. In Journal of Quantitative Analysis in Sports. 10(4): 381-396.
Strobi, C., Boulesteix, A.L., Zeileis, A. and Hothorn, T. (2007). Bias in random forest variable
       importance measures: Illustrations, sources and a solution. In BMC Bioinformatics. 8:25.
Stuart, C. (2008). “The final value of a passing touchdown.” Pro Football Reference Blog, October
       3, 2008. http:// http://www.pro-football-reference.com/blog/index4db6.html?p=633. Accessed
       July 1, 2016.



APPENDIX
Here we will explore in detail some of our model predictions for the 2014 wide
receiver free agent class. We focus on this group of 67 wide receiver free agents in
the NFL in 2014 as they had a variety of intriguing storylines and a larger sample
than that of tight ends. There were a few receivers who had experienced some
success and were looking to continue that success elsewhere, while there were
many looking to prove their skills.
       Desean Jackson had a breakout year in the 2013 season, his sixth season in the
NFL. He accumulated 82 catches for 1332 yards and 9 touchdowns. These were
career highs in catches and yards, and tied his career high in touchdowns. His 1332
yards put him as the ninth leading receiver in the NFL. After the Eagles cut Desean,
he was quickly signed by the Redskins to the highest average cap hit deal given to
a wide receiver that offseason. Our models projected Desean to have the best
performance in this class in our average performance measures, including NFL
career score per year post-free agency, which our model projected him to have
890.5. In his first six seasons, Desean’s NFL career score per year to date was
1122.4. Our projected decrease in average performance likely came from the fact
that it was questionable how many more years Desean would be in his prime, as he
turned 28 years old in the 2014 season. In the first two years of this deal, Desean
achieved an NFL career score per year of 945, which is slightly higher, but not too
Predicting the Future of Free Agent Receivers and Tight Ends in the NFL             293

far from our projection of 890.5.
       The next highest paid free agent receiver in the 2014 offseason was Eric
Decker. Decker had shown consistently strong performance over the prior two
seasons, especially in 2013, as he nearly reached 1300 yards. After signing with the
Jets, people wondered if Decker could continue his high performance with an
inexperienced quarterback, Geno Smith, after his past years with Peyton Manning.
According to our models, Decker was projected to have the best cumulative
performance after free agency of all of this year’s wide receiver free agents and the
second highest NFL career score per year post-free agency of 808.6. Decker
achieved an NFL career score per year of 1158.55 from 2014 to 2015, including a
1000-yard season in 2015 when paired with Brandon Marshall, as Ryan Fitzpatrick
took over at quarterback for the Jets. It remains to be seen if Decker’s average post-
free agency performance will fall toward his projection after he passes out of his
prime years, but his fit as the number two receiver in Chan Gailey’s offense has
helped him beat his projection thus far.
       Two younger free agent receivers who were looking to take another step in
their careers were Golden Tate (former Seahawk) and Andre Roberts (former
Cardinal). Tate received substantial attention from the Seahawks Super Bowl run
in the 2013 season. Potentially as a result of this attention, despite the fact that Tate
only had 72 more yards than Roberts over the first four years of their careers, Tate
was given a five-year contract with an average cap hit of $6.2 million per year, while
Roberts was given a four-year contract with an average cap hit of $4 million.
Roberts, though, was projected to perform better in the future by our models.
However, we acknowledge that this projection did not account for the fact that Tate
was entering a better situation as the number two receiver to Calvin Johnson in
Detroit with Matt Stafford at quarterback, while Roberts became the number three
receiver behind Desean Jackson and Pierre Garcon in Washington with a questionable
quarterback situation.
       If we were to adjust our projections due to these situations, we would have
adjusted Roberts down from the NFL career score per year post-free agency of
808.2, while for Tate, we would have adjusted up from the NFL career score per year
post-free agency of 489.6. In the end, these adjustments would have been appropriate,
as Tate had a breakout season in 2014 and has an NFL career score of 1168.5 for
the 2014 and 2015 seasons, while Roberts achieved a NFL career score of 322.3 due
to his status on the depth chart and the Redskins’ quarterback problems, as he is now
primarily used as a kick returner.
       While Tate and Roberts were the notable young receivers in this class, Steve
Smith was the notable older receiver. Smith spent 13 years as a Carolina Panther,
294                                                        Mulholland, J., Jensen, S.T.


including 5 years as a pro bowl player. He even led the NFL in catches, receiving
yards, and receiving touchdowns in 2005. For the first time in his NFL career, at age
35, he played for a team other than the Carolina Panthers. Our models projected that
Smith would be in the top ten in the average performance categories in this group
of 67, but not in the top ten in cumulative performance, which clearly makes sense
as he does not have too many years left in the NFL. In the end, Smith has been
productive for the Ravens, accumulating an NFL career score per year of 954.35,
relatively high as compared to his projection of 590.2.
      Kenny Britt was another interesting storyline in this wide receiver group.
While he did not get much attention from the media, the St. Louis Rams were quick
to sign Britt. This signing marked the reuniting of Britt with coach Jeff Fisher who
originally drafted Britt to the Titans in 2009. Britt had injury problems over the three
years prior to free agency, along with multiple violations of the personal conduct
policy resulting in a suspension. His performance fell sharply after a promising first
two years in the league, and Fisher likely believed he could return Britt to his past
level of play. Our model projected Britt to have an 80% chance of being signed and
an unexpectedly high NFL career score per year post-free agency of 577.1 (given
he had an NFL career score of only 96 for the 2013 season). Our model expected
him to recover somewhat from his past few years of disappointment, but probably
not to come all the way back to his performance level in 2009 and 2010. In the end,
Britt has been productive as our models indicated, even surpassing our model’s
prediction to achieve an NFL career score per year of 772.4 over the 2014 and 2015
seasons.
      Overall, these projections were relatively accurate or were made inaccurate
by factors that we were able to point out prior to the season (such as the depth chart
situations that Tate and Roberts entered). However, it is important to note that our
projections were not just for this season, but were instead for the remainder of each
player’s career. It will be interesting to see if these players trend more towards our
projections moving forward.
